# bhava

``` toml
dict_label = "PTS"
word = "bhava"
summary = "“becoming”, (form of) rebirth, (state of) existenc"
see_also = ["iti", "bhava", "bhū", "agga", "aṅga", "antara", "āsava", "uppatti", "esanā", "ogha", "ogha", "cakka", "taṇhā", "netti", "saṃyojana", "arahant", "salla", "sāta", "bhū", "bhavati"]
```

“becoming”, (form of) rebirth, (state of) existence, a “life.” There are 3 states of existence conventionally enumerated as *kāma˚ rūpa˚, arūpa˚*; or sensual existence, deva\-corporeal, formless existence (cp. rūpa) DN.ii.57; DN.iii.216; SN.ii.3 SN.iv.258; AN.ii.223; AN.iii.444; Mnd.48; Cnd. s.v. dhātu B. Vism.210 = DN\-a.i.34; Vism.529; Vb\-a.204  
■ Another view is represented by the division of bhava into *kamma˚*; and *upapatti˚*; (uppatti˚), or the active functioning of a life in relation to the fruitional, or resultant way of the next life (cp. *Cpd.* 43) Vb.137 Vism.571; Vb\-a.183; also in def. of bhava at Cnd.471 (kamma˚ and paṭisandhika punabbhava)  
■ In the “causal chain” (Paṭicca\-samuppāda, q.v.) bhava is represented as condition of birth (jāti), or resultant force for new birth  
■ See Snp.361, Snp.514, Snp.742, Snp.839, Snp.923 Snp.1055, Snp.1133; Dhp.348; Mnd.274; Vb.294, Vb.358; Vism.556 sq.; Dhp\-a.iv.221; Sdhp.33, Sdhp.333, Sdhp.335  
■ On *itibhav’ ābhava* see *[iti](iti.md)*, and add ref. Vb.375  
■ A remarkable use of *[bhava](bhava.md)* as *nt*. (obstr.) to *[bhū](bhū.md)* (in cpd.) is to be noted in the def. given by Bdhgh. of divya = divi bhavaṃ (for divi\-bhū) Kp\-a.227; Snp\-a.199; and mānasaṃ = manasi bhavaṃ (for manasi\-bhū) Kp\-a.248, cp. Pāṇini iv.3, 53 Similarly āroga bhava health Dhp\-a.i.328 for ˚bhava\-Cp. anu˚, vi˚, sam˚.

*\-[agga](agga.md)* the best (state of) existence, the highest point of existence (among the gods) Ja.iii.84; Vb.426; Mil.132; Kp\-a.179, Kp\-a.249; Snp\-a.17, Snp\-a.41, Snp\-a.507; often as highest “heaven” as opposed to Avīci, the lowest hell; thus at Ja.iv.182; Ja.vi.354; Mil.336. *\-[aṅga](aṅga.md)* constituent of becoming, function of being, functional state of subconsciousness i.e. subliminal consciousness or subconscious life\-continuum, the vital continuum in the absence of any process (of mind, or attention) (thus Mrs Rh. D. in *Expos.* 185 n.), subconscious individual life See on term *Cpd.* 26 sq., 265–⁠267; & cp.; *Dhs trsl.* 134, Ja.vi.82; Mil.299 sq.; Vism.164, Vism.676; Dhs\-a.72, Dhs\-a.140 Dhs\-a.269; Dhp\-a.i.23; Vb\-a.81, Vb\-a.156 sq., Vb\-a.406. *\-antaga* “gone to the ends of existence,” past existence, epithet of the Bhagavan Buddha Vism.210. *\-[antara](antara.md)* an existence interval, i.e. transition fr. one life to another, a previous or subsequent life Vism.553 sq. *\-ābhava* this or that life, any form of existence some sort of existence Snp.1060, Snp.1068; Mnd.48, Mnd.109, Mnd.284; Cnd.472, Cnd.664 A Thag.784 (Thag\-a mahantāmahanta bh.) Thag\-a.71 (Ap. v 30); Vb\-a.501. *\-[āsava](āsava.md)* the intoxicant of existence DN.iii.216; Vb.364, Vb.373. *\-[uppatti](uppatti.md)* coming into (a new ex  
■ Four such bh\- uppattis lead to rebirth among the foll. gods: the paritt’\-ābhā devā, the appamāṇ’ābhā d., the sankiliṭṭh’\-ābhā d., the parisuddh’\-ābhā d MN.iii.147. *\-[esanā](esanā.md)* longing for rebirth DN.iii.216, DN.iii.270 *\-[ogha](ogha.md)* the flood of rebirth (see *[ogha](ogha.md)*) Mnd.57, Mnd.159 Vism.480. *\-[cakka](cakka.md)* the wheel or round of rebirth equivalent to the Paṭicca\-samuppāda Vism.529 Vism.576 sq.; in the same context at Vb\-a.138, Vb\-a.194 sq *\-carimakā* the last rebirth Vism.291. *\-[taṇhā](taṇhā.md)* craving for rebirth DN.iii.212, DN.iii.216, DN.iii.274; SN.v.432; Snp.746; Vb.101, Vb.358, Vb.365; Thig.458; Thag\-a.282; Vb\-a.iii.133 *\-[netti](netti.md)* [cp. BSk. bhava\-netrī M. Vastu ii.307; ˚netrika iii.337] leader to renewed ex., guide to ex. Vin.i.231; Iti.38; Dhs.1059≈ (cp. Dhs\-a.364 = bhava\-rajju). *\-[saṃyojana](saṃyojana.md)* the fetter of rebirth: see *[arahant](arahant.md)* II. C. *\-[salla](salla.md)* the sting or dart of rebirth Dhp.351 (= sabbāni bhavagāmīni sallāni Dhp\-a.iv.70). *\-[sāta](sāta.md)* (pl. sātāni) the pleasures of ex., variously enumerated in sets of from one to six at Mnd.30. *\-ssita* at Ja.v.371 read with variant reading as ghaṭa\-ssita.

cp. Sk. bhava, as philosophical term late, but as Name of a deity Vedic; of *[bhū](bhū.md)*, see *[bhavati](bhavati.md)*

