# kata

``` toml
dict_label = "NCPED"
word = "kata"
summary = "made, done; worked, fashioned, manufactured, treat"
grammar_comment = "pp mfn."
see_also = ["karoti"]
```

made, done; worked, fashioned, manufactured, treated; performed, carried out; placed; what is done, what has been done

--------------------

``` toml
dict_label = "PTS"
word = "kata"
summary = "(& sometimes; kaṭa) done, worked, made. Extremely"
see_also = ["kaṭa", "sukata", "dukkata", "a", "kamma", "kicca", "ussāha", "kalyāṇa", "kibbisa", "kusala", "kalyāṇa", "thaddha", "kalyāṇa", "nissama", "pāpa", "kalyāṇa", "puñña", "bahukāra", "kalyāṇa", "ludda", "vināsaka", "vissāsa", "attha", "okāsa", "nāmadheyya", "paṭisanthāra", "pariggaha", "paritta", "bhaddaka", "sakkāra", "saṅgaha", "sannāha"]
```

(& sometimes; *[kaṭa](kaṭa.md)*) done, worked, made. Extremely rare as v. trs. in the common meaning of E. make, Ger. machen, or Fr. faire (see the cognate *kapp* and *jan*, also uppajjati & vissajjati); its proper sphere of application is either ethical (as pāpaṃ, kusalaṃ kammaṃ: cp. ii.1 b) or in such combinations, where its original meaning of “built, prepared, worked out” is still preserved (cp. i.1 a nagara, and 2 a).

### I. As *verb\-determinant* (predicative). ###

1. in verbal function (Pass.) with nominal determination “done made”
   1. in predicative (epithetic) position: Dhp.17 (pāpaṃ me kataṃ evil has been done by me), Dhp.68 (tañ ca kammaṃ kataṃ), Dhp.150 (aṭṭhīnaṃ nagaraṃ kataṃ a city built of bones, of the body), Dhp.173 (yassa pāpaṃ kataṃ kammaṃ)\-
   2. in absolute (prothetic) position, often with expression of the agent in instr. DN.i.84 = DN.i.177 = MN.i.40 = Snp.p.16 (in formula kataṃ karanīyaṃ, etc., done is what had to be done, cp. arahant ii.A.); Vin.iii.72 (kataṃ mayā kalyāṇaṃ akataṃ mayā pāpaṃ); Pv.i.5#5 (amhākaṃ katā pūjā done to us is homage)  
      ■ So also in composition (˚\-), e.g. (nahāpakehi) *\-parikammatā* the preparations (being) finished (by the barbers) Ja.vi.145 (tena) *\-paricaya* the acquaintance made (with him Vv\-a.24; Pv\-a.4; (tattha) *\-paricayatā* the acquaintance (with that spot) Vv\-a.331; (tesaṃ) *\-pubba* done before DN.ii.75 = AN.iv.17; (kena) Ja.vi.575; *\-matta* (made drunk Thag.199; (cira) *\-saṃsagga* having (long) been in contact with, familiar Ja.iii.63 (and a˚).

2. in adj (med\-passive) function (kaṭa & kata); either passive made, or made of; done by = being like, consisting of or medio\-reflexive: one who has done, having done also “with” (i.e. this or that action done)
   1. *in pregnant meaning:* prepared, cultivated, trained, skilled kaṭ\-âkaṭa prepared & natural Vin.i.206 (of yūsa) akaṭa natural ibid., not cultivated (of soil) Vin.i.48 Vin.ii.209; DN\-a.i.78, DN\-a.i.98; untrained Ja.iii.57, Ja.iii.58  
      ■ *\-atta* selfpossessed disciplined Ja.vi.296; *\-indiya* trained in his senses Thag.725; *\-ūpāsana* skilled, esp. in archery MN.i.82; SN.i.62; AN.ii.48 = AN.iv.429; SN.i.99; Ja.iv.211; Mil.352, *\-kamma* practised, skilled Ja.v.243; of a servant SN.i.205 (read āse for ase), of a thief AN.iii.102 (cp. below ii.1 a); *\-phaṇa* having (i.e. with) its hood erected, of a snake Ja.vi.166; *\-buddhi* of trained mind clever Ja.iii.58; a˚ ibid.; *\-mallaka* of made\-up teeth, an artificial back\-scratcher Vin.ii.316; a˚ not artificially made, the genuine article Vin.ii.106; *\-yogga* trained serviceable SN.i.99; a˚ useless SN.i.98. *\-rūpa* done naturally, spontaneously Ja.v.317 (explained by ˚jāniya ˚sabhāva); *\-veṇī* having (i.e. with) the hair done up into a chignon Ja.v.431; *\-hattha* (one) who has exercised his hands, dexterous, skilful, esp. in archery MN.i.82; SN.i.62, SN.i.98; SN.ii.266; AN.ii.48; Ja.iv.211; Ja.v.41; Ja.vi.448; Mil.353; Dhp\-a.i.358; a˚ unskilled, awkward SN.i.98 su˚ well\-trained Ja.v.41 (cp. ˚upāsana), *\-hatthika* an artificial or toy\-elephant Ja.vi.551
   2. *in ordinary meaning:* made or done; *\-kamma* the deed done (in a former existence) Ja.i.167; Vv\-a.252; Pv\-a.10; *\-piṭṭha* made of flour (dough) Pv\-a.16 (of a doll); *\-bhāva* the performance or happening of Ja.iii.400; Mhbv.33 *\-saṅketa* (one who has made an agreement) Ja.v.436\-
   3. *with adverbial determination* (su˚, du˚; cp. dūrato puro, atta, sayaṃ, & ii.2 c): *[sukata](sukata.md)* well laid out, of a road Ja.vi.293, well built, of a cart Snp.300 = Snp.304; Ja.iv.395, well done, i.e. good AN.i.102 (˚kamma\-kārin doing good works). *\-[dukkata](dukkata.md)* badly made, of a robe Vin.iv.279 (ṭ), badly done, i.e. evil AN.i.102 (˚kamma kārin) *sukata\-dukkata* good & evil (˚kammāni deeds) DN.i.27 DN.i.55 = SN.iv.351; Mil.5, Mil.25.

3. as noun (nt.) *kataṃ* that which has been done, the deed
   1. *absolute:* Ja.iii.26 (katassa appaṭikāraka not reciprocating the deed), Ja.v.434 (kataṃ anukaroti he imitates what has been done *kat\-ākataṃ* what has been done & left undone Vin.iv.211; katāni akatāni ca deeds done & not done Dhp.50
   2. *with adv. determination* (su˚, du˚) sukataṃ goodness (in moral sense) Snp.240; Dhp.314 dukkataṃ badness Vin.i.76; Vin.ii.106; Dhp.314; dukkatakārin doing wrong Snp.664.

### II. As *noun\-determinant* (attributive) in composition ###

(var. applications & meanings).

1. *As 1st pt. of compd:* Impersonal, denoting the result or finishing of that which is implied in the object with ref. to the act or state resulting, i.e. “so and so made or done” or personal, denoting the person affected by or concerned with the act. The lit. translation would be “having become one who has done” (act.: see *[a](a.md)*), or “to whom has been done” (pass.: see b)
   1. *medio\-active Temporal:* the action being done, i.e. “after.” The noun\-determinates usually bear a relation to *time*, especially to meal\-times, as *kat\-anna\-kicca* having finished his meal Dāvs i.59; *\-bhatta\-kicca* after the meal Ja.iv.123; Pv\-a.93; *\-purebhatta\-kicca* having finished the duties of the morning DN\-a.i.45 sq.; Snp\-a.131 sq.; *\-pātarāsa* breakfast Ja.i.227; Dhp\-a.i.117, a before br. AN.iv.64; *\-pātarāsa\-bhatta* id. Ja.vi.349 *\-ānumodana* after thanking (for the meal) Ja.i.304 *\-bhatt’ānumodana* after expressing satisfaction with the meal Pv\-a.141. In the same application: *kat\-okāsa* having made its appearance, of kamma Vv.32#9 (cp Vv\-a.113); Pv\-a.63; *\-kamma* (\-cora) (a thief) who has just “done the deed,” i.e. committed a theft Ja.iii.34 Vism.180 (katakammā corā & akata˚ thieves who have finished their “job” & those who have not); Dhp\-a.ii.38 (corehi katakammaṃ the job done by the th.), cp above i.2 a; *\-kāla* “done their time,” deceased, of Petas Ja.iii.164 (pete kālakate); Pv\-a.29, cp. kāla *\-cīvara* after finishing his robe Vin.i.255, Vin.i.265; *\-paccuggamana* having gone forth to meet Ja.iii.93. *\-paṇidhāna* from the moment of his making an earnest resolve (to become a Buddha) Vv\-a.3; *\-pariyosita* finished, ready, i.e. after the end was made Vv\-a.250 *\-buddha\-kicca* after he had done the obligations of a Buddha Vv\-a.165, Vv\-a.319; DN\-a.i.2; *\-maraṇa* after dying i.e. dead Pv\-a.29; *\-massu\-kamma* after having his beard done Ja.v.309 (see note to ii.1 b)  
      ■ *Qualitative:* with ethical import, the state resulting out of action i.e. of such habit, or “like, of such character.” The qualification is either made by *[kamma](kamma.md)*, deed, work, or *[kicca](kicca.md)*, what can be or ought to be done, or any other specified action, as *\-pāpa\-kamma* one who has done wrong Dhp\-a.i.360 (& a˚); *\-karaṇīya* one who has done all that could be done, one who is in the state of perfection (an Arahant), in formula arahaṃ khīṇ’āsavo vusitavā ohitabhāro (cp. above i.1 b & arahant; ii.A MN.i.4, MN.i.235; Iti.38; Mil.138; *\-kicca* having performed his obligations, perfected, epithet of an Arahant, usually in combination with anāsava SN.i.47, SN.i.178; Dhp.386; Pv.ii.6#15 Thig.337, as adj.: kata\-kiccāni hi arahato indriyāni Ne.20; *\-kiccatā* the perfection of Arahantship Mil.339  
      ■ With other determinations: *\-āgasa* one who has done evil Sdhp.294. *\-ādhikāra* having exerted oneself one who strives after the right path Ja.i.56; Mil.115 *\-āparādha* guilty, a transgressor Ja.iii.42. *\-ābhinihāra* (one) who has formed the resolution (to become a Buddha) Ja.i.2; Dhp\-a.i.135. *\-ābhinivesa* (one) who studies intently, or one who has made a strong determination Ja.i.110 (& a˚).; *\-[ussāha](ussāha.md)* energetic Sdhp.127 *\-[kalyāṇa](kalyāṇa.md)* in passage kata\-kalyāno kata\-kusalo katabhīruttāṇo akata\-pāpo akata\-luddho (luddo) [: ˚thaddho It] akata\-kibbiso having done good, of good character, etc. AN.ii.174 = Vin.iii.72 = Iti.25 = Dhs\-a.383; Pv\-a.174; also Pass. to whom something good has been done Ja.i.137; Ja.iii.12; Pv.ii.9#9; akata\-kalyāṇa a man of bad actions Iti.25; Pv.ii.7#9. *\-[kibbisa](kibbisa.md)* a guilty person MN.i.39; Vin.iii.72 (a˚), of beings tormented in Purgatory Pv.iv.7#7; Pv\-a.59. *\-[kusala](kusala.md)* a good man: see ˚*[kalyāṇa](kalyāṇa.md)* *\-[thaddha](thaddha.md)* hard\-hearted, unfeeling, cruel: see ˚*[kalyāṇa](kalyāṇa.md)* *\-[nissama](nissama.md)* untiring, valiant, bold Ja.v.243. *\-parappavāda* practised in disputing with others DN\-a.i.117. *\-[pāpa](pāpa.md)* an evil\-doer Iti.25; Pv.ii.7#9 (\+ akata\-kalyāṇa); Pv\-a.5 a˚: see ˚*[kalyāṇa](kalyāṇa.md)*. *\-[puñña](puñña.md)* one who has done good deeds a good man DN.ii.144; Dhp.16, Dhp.18, Dhp.220; Pv.iii.5#2; Mil.129; Pv\-a.5, Pv\-a.176; a˚ one who has not done good (in previous lives) Mil.250; Vv\-a.94. *\-puññatā* the fact of having done good deeds DN.iii.276 (pubbe in former births) AN.ii.31; Snp.260, cp. Kp\-a.132, Kp\-a.230; Ja.ii.114. *\-[bahukāra](bahukāra.md)* having done much favour, obliging Dāvs iv.39. *\-bhīruttāṇa* one who has offered protection to the fearful see ˚*[kalyāṇa](kalyāṇa.md)*. *\-bhūmikamma* one who has laid the ground\-work (of sanctification) Mil.352. *\-[ludda](ludda.md)* cruel MN.iii.165; a˚ gentle Ne.180; cp ˚kalyāṇa *\-[vināsaka](vināsaka.md)* (one) who has caused ruin Ja.i.467. *\-[vissāsa](vissāsa.md)* trusting, confiding Ja.i.389. *\-ssama* painstaking, taking trouble Sdhp.277 (and a˚)
   2. *medio\-passive:* The state as result of an action, which affected the person concerned with the action (reflexive or passive), or “possessed of, afflicted or affected with.” In this application it is simply periphrastic for the ordinary Passive  
      ■ *Note.* In the case of the noun being incapable of functioning as verb (when primary), the object in question is specified by *\-kamma* or *\-kicca*, both of which are then only supplementary to the initial kata˚, e.g. kata\-massu\-kamma “having had the beard (\-doing done,” as diff. fr. secondary nouns (i.e. verb\-derivations) e.g. kat\-âbhiseka “having had the anointing done  
      ■ In this application: ˚citta\-kamma decorated, variegated Dhp\-a.i.192; ˚daṇḍa\-kamma afflicted with punishment (= daṇḍāyita punished) Vin.i.76; ˚massu\-kamma with trimmed beard, after the beard\-trimming Ja.v.309 (cp. Ja.iii.11 & karana)  
      ■ Various combinations: *katañjalin* with raised hands, as a token of veneration or supplication Snp.1023; Thig.482; Ja.i.17 = Bv.24, Bv.27; Pv\-a.50, Pv\-a.141; Vv\-a.78. *\-[attha](attha.md)* one who has received benefits Ja.i.378. *\-ānuggaha* assisted, aided Ja.ii.449; Vv\-a.102. *\-ābhiseka* anointed, consecrated Mhvs.26, Mhvs.6 *\-ūpakāra* assisted, befriended Ja.i.378; Pv\-a.116. *\-[okāsa](okāsa.md)* one who has been given permission, received into audience, or permitted to speak Vin.i.7; DN.ii.39, DN.ii.277; Snp.1030, Snp.1031 (˚âva˚); Ja.v.140; Ja.vi.341; Mil.95. *\-jātihiṅgulika* done up, adorned with pure vermilion Ja.iii.303 *\-[nāmadheyya](nāmadheyya.md)* having received a name, called Ja.v.492 *\-[paṭisanthāra](paṭisanthāra.md)* having been received kindly Ja.vi.160; Dhp\-a.i.80. *\-[pariggaha](pariggaha.md)* being taken to wife, married to (instr.) Pv\-a.161 (& a˚).; *\-[paritta](paritta.md)* one on whom a protective spell has been worked, charm\-protected Mil.152 *\-[bhaddaka](bhaddaka.md)* one to whom good has been done Pv\-a.116 *\-[sakkāra](sakkāra.md)* honoured, revered Ja.v.353; Mhvs.9, Mhvs.8 (su˚) *\-[saṅgaha](saṅgaha.md)* one who has taken part in the redaction of the Scriptures Mhvs.5, Mhvs.106. *\-[sannāha](sannāha.md)* clad in armour Dhp\-a.i.358. *\-sikkha* (having been) trained Mil.353

2. *As second part of compd:* Denoting the performance of the verbal notion with ref. to the object affected by it i.e. simply a Passive of the verb implied in the determinant with emphasis of the verb\-notion: “made so & so, used as, reduced to” (garukata = garavita).
   1. with *nouns* (see *s*. v.) e.g. , anabhāva\-kata, kavi˚ kāla\-vaṇṇa˚ (reduced to a black colour) Vin.i.48 Vin.ii.209, tāl’āvatthu˚, pamāṇa˚, bahuli˚, yāni˚, sankhār’ûpekkhā˚ etc
   2. with *adjectives*, e.g. garu˚, bahu˚\-
   3. with *adverbial* substitutes, e.g. atta˚, para (paraṃ˚), sacchi˚, sayaṃ, etc.

pp. of karoti

