# sīla

``` toml
dict_label = "PTS"
word = "sīla"
summary = "nature, character, habit behaviour; usually as-˚ i"
grammar_comment = "neuter"
see_also = ["dussīla", "susīla", "sampadā", "dhammā", "sīla", "sikkhāpada", "sīla", "sikkhāpada", "sīlakkhandha", "paññākkhandha", "suta", "sīla", "sīla", "adhisīla", "sīla", "aṅga", "ācāra", "kathā", "gandha", "caraṇa", "tittha", "sīlavata", "bheda", "mattaka", "maya", "maya", "vatta", "vipatti", "vipanna", "vīmaṃsaka", "saṃvara", "saṃvuta", "sampatti", "sampadā", "sampanna", "samādhi", "upadhāraṇa"]
```

1. nature, character, habit behaviour; usually as\-˚ in adj. function “being of such a nature,” like, having the character of…, e.g. *adāna˚*; of stingy character, illiberal Snp.244; Pv\-a.68 (\+ maccharin); *kiṃ˚*; of what behaviour? Pv.ii.9#13 *keḷi˚*; tricky Pv\-a.241; *damana˚*; one who conquers Pv\-a.251; *parisuddha˚*; of excellent character AN.iii.124 *pāpa˚*; wicked Snp.246; *bhaṇana˚*; wont to speak Dhp\-a.iv.93; *vāda˚*; quarrelsome Snp.381 sq  
   ■ *[dussīla](dussīla.md)* (of) bad character DN.iii.235; Dhs.1327; Pp.20, Pp.53; Pv.ii.8#2 (noun); Pv.ii.9#69 (adj.); Dhp\-a.ii.252; Dhp\-a.iv.3; Sdhp.338; Mil.257; opp. *[susīla](susīla.md)* SN.i.141.
2. moral practice, good character, Buddhist ethics, code of morality.
   1. The *dasa\-sīla* or 10 items of good character (*not* “commandments”) are
      1. *pāṇātipātā veramaṇī*, i.e. abstinence from taking life;
      2. *adinn’ādānā* (from) taking what is not given to one;
      3. *abrahmacariyā* adultery (oṭherwise called *kāmesu micchā\-cārā*);
      4. *musāvādā* telling lies;
      5. *pisuna\-vācāya* slander;
      6. *pharusa\-vācāya* harsh or impolite speech;
      7. *samphappalāpā* frivolous and senseless talk;
      8. *abhijjhāya* covetousness
      9. *byāpādā* malevolence;
      10. *micchādiṭṭhiyā* heretic views

      ■ Of these 10 we sometimes find only the first 7 designated as “sīla” per se, or good character generally See e.g. AN.i.269 (where called sīla\-sampadā); AN.ii.83 sq (*not* called “sīla”), & *[sampadā](sampadā.md)*
   2. The *pañca\-sīla* or 5 items of good behaviour are Nos. 1–4 of dasa\-sīla and (5) abstaining from any state of indolence arising from (the use of) intoxicants, viz. surā\-meraya\-majjapamāda\-ṭṭhānā veramaṇī. These five also from the first half of the 10 *sikkha\-padāni*. They are a sort of preliminary condition to any higher development after conforming to the teaching of the Buddha (saraṇaṃgamana) and as such often mentioned when a new follower is “officially” installed, e.g. Bv.ii.190: saraṇâgamane kañci nivesesi Tathāgato kañci pañcasu sīlesu sīle dasavidhe paraṃ. From Pv.iv.1#76 sq. (as also fr. Kp ii. as following upon Kp i.) it is evident that the *sikkhāpadāni* are meant in this connection (either 5 or 10), and *not* the *sīlaṃ*, cp. also Pv.iv.3#50 sq., although at the above passage of Bv and at Ja.i.28 as well as at Mhvs.18, Mhvs.10 the expression *dasa\-sīla* is used: evidently a later development of the term as regards dasa\-sīla (cp. *Mvu translation* 122, n. 3), which through the identity of the 5 sīlas & sikkhāpadas was transferred to the 10 sikkhāpadas. These 5 are often simply called; *pañca dhammā*, e.g. at AN.iii.203 sq., AN.iii.208 sq. Without a special title they are mentioned in connection with the “saraṇaṃ gata” formula e.g. at AN.iv.266. Similarly the 10 sīlas (as above a) are only called *[dhammā](dhammā.md)* at AN.ii.253 sq.; AN.v.260; nor are they designated as *[sīla](sīla.md)* at AN.ii.221  
      ■ pañcasu sīlesu samādapeti to instruct in the 5 sīlas (alias sikkhāpadāni) Vin.ii.162
   3. The only standard enumerations of the 5 or 10 sīlas are found at two places in the Saṃyutta and correspond with those given in the Niddesa. See on the 10 (as given under a) SN.iv.342 & Cnd s. v. sīla; on the 5 (also as under b SN.ii.68 & Cnd s. v. The so\-called 10 sīlas (Childers) as found at Kp ii. (under the name of *dasa\-sikkhāpada* are of late origin & served as memorial verses for the use of novices. Strictly speaking they should not be called; *dasa\-sīla*  
      ■ The *eightfold* sīla or the eight pledges which are recommended to the Buddhist layman (cp Mil.333 mentioned below) are the *sikkhāpadas* Nos 1–8 (see *[sikkhāpada](sikkhāpada.md)*), which in the Canon however do not occur under the name of *[sīla](sīla.md)* nor *[sikkhāpada](sikkhāpada.md)*, but as *aṭṭhaṅga\-samannāgata uposatha* (or *aṭṭhaṅgika u*. “the fast\-day with its 8 constituents.” They are discussed in detail at AN.iv.248 sq., with a poetical setting of the eight at AN.iv.254 = Snp.400, Snp.401.
   4. Three special tracts on morality are found in the Canon. The *Cullasīla* (DN.i.3 sq.) consists first of the items (dasa) sīla 1\-7 then follow specific injunctions as to practices of daily living & special conduct, of which the first 5 (omitting the introductory item of bījagāma\-bhūtagāma\-samārambha) form the seco nd.5 sikkhāpadāni. Upon the; *Culla˚*; follows the *Majjhima˚*; (DN.i.5 sq.) & then the; *Mahāsīla* DN.i.9 sq. The whole of these 3 sīlas is called *[sīlakkhandha](sīlakkhandha.md)* and is (in the Sāmaññaphala sutta e.g.) grouped with *samādhi\-* and *[paññākkhandha](paññākkhandha.md)*: DN.i.206 sq.; at AN.v.205, AN.v.206 sīla\-kkhandha refers to the Culla\-sīla only The three (s., samādhi & paññā) are often mentioned together, e.g. DN.ii.81, DN.ii.84; Iti.51; DN\-a.i.57  
      ■ The characteristic of a kalyāṇa\-mitta is endowment with *saddhā, sīla, cāga, paññā* AN.iv.282. These four are counted as constituents of future bliss AN.iv.282, and form the 4 sampadās ibid. 322. In another connection at MN.iii.99; Vism.19. They are, with *[suta](suta.md)* (foll. after sīla) characteristic of the merit of the *devatās* AN.i.210 sq (under devat’ânussati)  
      ■ At Mil.333 sīla is classed as: saraṇa˚, pañca˚, aṭṭhanga˚, dasanga˚, pātimokkhasaṃvara˚ all of which expressions refer to the *sikkhāpadas* and not to the *sīlas*  
      ■ At Mil.336 sq. *[sīla](sīla.md)* functions as one of the 7 *ratanas* (the 5 as given under sampadā up to vimuttiñāṇadassana; *plus* paṭisambhidā and bojjhanga)  
      ■ *cattāro sīlakkhandhā* “4 sections of morality” Mil.243; Vism.15 & Dhs\-a.168 (here as pātimokkha\-saṃvara, indriya\-saṃvara, ājīvapārisuddhi, paccaya\-sannissita. The same with ref to catubbidha sīla at Ja.iii.195). See also under compounds At Pts.i.46 sq. we find the fivefold grouping as 1 pāṇâtipatassa pahānaṃ, 2 veramaṇī, 3 cetanā 4 saṃvara, 5 avītikkama, which is commented on at Vism.49  
      ■ A *fourfold* sīla (referring to the sikkhāpada is given at Vism.15 as bhikkhu˚, bhikkhunī˚, anupasampanna˚ gahaṭṭha˚  
      ■ On *[sīla](sīla.md)* and *[adhisīla](adhisīla.md)* see e.g. AN.i.229 sq.; Vb\-a.413 sq  
      ■ The division of *[sīla](sīla.md)* at Ja.iii.195 is a distinction of a simple sīla as “saṃvara, of twofold sīla as “*caritta\-vāritta*,” threefold as “*kāyika, vācasika, mānasika*,” and fourfold as above under *cattāro sīlakkhandhā*  
      ■ See further generally: Pts.i.42 sq.; Vism.3 sq.; Tikp.154, Kp.165 sq., Kp.269, Kp.277; Mnd.14, Mnd.188 (explained as “pātimokkha\-saṃvara”); Cnd.277 Vb\-a.143.

   *\-[aṅga](aṅga.md)* constituent of morality (applied to the pañcasikkhāpadaṃ) Vb\-a.381. *\-[ācāra](ācāra.md)* practice of morality Ja.i.187; Ja.ii.3. *\-[kathā](kathā.md)* exposition of the duties of morality Vin.i.15; AN.i.125; Ja.i.188. *\-kkhandha* all that belongs to moral practices, body of morality as forming the first constituent of the 5 khandhas or groups (\+ samādhi˚ paññā˚, vimutti˚, ñāṇadassana\-kkhandha), which make up the 5 *sampadās* or whole range of religious development; see e.g. Mnd.21, Mnd.39; Cnd.p.277  
   ■ Vin.i.162 sq. Vin.iii.164; AN.i.124, AN.i.291; AN.ii.20; SN.i.99 sq.; Iti.51, Iti.107 Ne.90 sq., Ne.128; Mil.243; Dhp\-a.iii.417. *\-[gandha](gandha.md)* the fragrance of good works Dhp.55; Vism.58. *\-[caraṇa](caraṇa.md)* moral life Ja.iv.328, Ja.iv.332. *\-[tittha](tittha.md)* having good behaviour as its banks SN.i.169, SN.i.183 (*translation* Mrs. Rh. D. “with virtue’s strand for bathing”). *\-bbata* [= vata2] good works and ceremonial observances Dhp.271; AN.i.225; SN.iv.118; Ud.71; Snp.231, etc.; sīlavata the same Snp.212 Snp.782, Snp.790, Snp.797, Snp.803, Snp.899; Iti.79 sq.; *˚\-parāmāsa* the contagion of mere rule and ritual, the infatuation of good works, the delusion that they suffice Vin.i.184; MN.i.433; Dhs.1005; AN.iii.377; AN.iv.144 sq.; Mnd.98; Duka\-pa.245 , Kp.282 sq.; Dhs\-a.348; see also expln at *Cpd.* 171, n.4 *sīlabbatupādāna* grasping after works and rites DN.ii.58; Dhs.1005, Dhs.1216; Vism.569; Vb\-a.181 sq  
   ■ The old form *[sīlavata](sīlavata.md)* still preserves the original good sense, as much as “observing the rules of good conduct,” “being of virtuous behaviour.” Thus at Thag.12; Snp.212, Snp.782 (explained in detail at Mnd.66), Snp.790, Snp.797, Snp.803; Iti.79; Ja.vi.491 (ariya˚). *\-[bheda](bheda.md)* a breach of morality Ja.i.296 *\-[mattaka](mattaka.md)* a matter of mere morality DN.i.3; DN\-a.i.55 *\-[maya](maya.md)* consisting in morality Iti.51; Vv\-a.10 (see *[maya](maya.md)* defn 6). *\-[vatta](vatta.md)* morality, virtue SN.i.143; cp. Ja.iii.360 *\-[vipatti](vipatti.md)* moral transgression Vin.i.171 sq.; DN.ii.85; AN.i.95; AN.i.268 sq.; AN.iii.252; Pp.21; Vism.54, Vism.57. *\-[vipanna](vipanna.md)* trespassing DN.ii.85; Pp.21; Vin.i.227. *\-[vīmaṃsaka](vīmaṃsaka.md)* testing one’s reputation Ja.i.369; Ja.ii.429; Ja.iii.100, Ja.iii.193 *\-[saṃvara](saṃvara.md)* self\-restraint in conduct DN.i.69; Dhs.1342; DN\-a.i.182. *\-[saṃvuta](saṃvuta.md)* living under moral self\-restraint Dhp.281. *\-[sampatti](sampatti.md)* accomplishment or attainment by moral living Vism.57. *\-[sampadā](sampadā.md)* practice of morality Vin.i.227; DN.ii.86; MN.i.194, MN.i.201 sq.; AN.i.95, AN.i.269 sq. AN.ii.66; Pp.25, Pp.54. *\-[sampanna](sampanna.md)* practising morality virtuous Vin.i.228; DN.i.63; DN.ii.86; MN.i.354; Thig.196 Thag\-a.168; DN\-a.i.182.

   cp. Sk. śīla. It is interesting to note that the Dhtp puts down a root *sīl* in meaning of *[samādhi](samādhi.md)* (No 268) and *[upadhāraṇa](upadhāraṇa.md)* (615)

