# vijjā

``` toml
dict_label = "PTS"
word = "vijjā"
summary = "one of the dogmatic terms of Buddhist teaching var"
grammar_comment = "feminine"
see_also = ["avijjā", "avijjā", "ñāṇa", "vijjā", "avijjā", "vijjā", "caraṇa", "vijjā", "anussarati", "pajānāti", "abhijānāti", "vijjā", "caraṇa", "ñāṇa", "vijjā", "vijjā", "vatthu", "gata", "caraṇa", "dhara", "iddhi", "vimutti", "vindati"]
```

one of the dogmatic terms of Buddhist teaching varying in meaning in diff. sections of the Canon. It is not always the positive to *[avijjā](avijjā.md)* (which has quite a well\-defined meaning from its first appearance in Buddhist psych. ethics), but has been taken into the terminology of Buddhism from Brahmanic and popular philosophy The opposite of *[avijjā](avijjā.md)* is usually *[ñāṇa](ñāṇa.md)* (but cp. SN.iii.162 f. SN.iii.171; SN.v.429). Although certain vijjās pertain to the recognition of the “truth” and the destruction of avijjā, yet they are only secondary factors in achieving “vimutti” (cp. abhiññā, ñāṇa\-dassana & paññā) That; *[vijjā](vijjā.md)* at MN.i.22 is contrasted with *[avijjā](avijjā.md)* is to be explained as a word\-play in a stereotype phrase  
■ A diff side of “knowledge” again is given by “bodhi.”

1. Vijjā is a general, popular term for lore in the old sense, science, study, esp. study as a practice of some art (something like the secret science of the medicine man: cp. vejja!); hence applied in special, “dogmatic sense as “secret science,” revelation (put into a sort of magic formula), higher knowledge (of the learned man), knowledge which may be applied and used as an art (cp. magister artium!), practical knowledge; but also *mysterious* knowledge: “charm.”
2. *[vijjā](vijjā.md)* having a varying content in its connotation, is applied to a series of diff. achievements. A rather old tabulation of the stages leading by degrees to the attainment of the highest knowledge is given in the Sāmañña\-phala\-sutta (DN.i.63–DN.i.86), repeated in nearly every Suttanta of D i. It is composed of the 3 *sampadās*, viz. sīla˚, citta˚ paññā˚. Under the first group belong sīla(\-kkhandha) indriya\-saṃvara, sati\-sampajañña, santuṭṭhi; the second is composed 1 of the overcoming of the *nīvaraṇas*, 2 of the 4 *jhānas;* the third consists of 8 items, viz 1 ñāṇa\-dassana, 2 manomaya\-kāya, 3 iddhi 4 dibba\-sota, 5 ceto\-pariyañāṇa, 6 pubbe\-nivās ânussatiñāṇa, 7 cut’ ûpapatti\-ñāṇa, 8 āsavānaṃ khaya\-ñāṇa. Other terms used are: for the 2nd sampadā: *[caraṇa](caraṇa.md)* (DN.i.100), and for the 3rd: *[vijjā](vijjā.md)* (ibid.). The discussion at DN.i.100 is represented as contradicting the (brahmaṇic) opinion of Ambaṭṭha, who thought that “vijjā nāma tayo Vedā, caraṇaṃ pañca sīlāni” (DN\-a.i.267 sq.)  
   ■ In the enumn of 3 vijjās at MN.i.22 sq. only Nos. 6–8 of the 3rd sampadā (said to have been attained by the Buddha in the 3 night watches) with the verbs *[anussarati](anussarati.md)* (No. 6), *[pajānāti](pajānāti.md)* (7), *[abhijānāti](abhijānāti.md)* (8), each signifying a higher stage of (“saving”) knowledge, yet all called “vijjā.” Quoted at Vism.202, where all 8 stages are given as “aṭṭha *[vijjā](vijjā.md)*,” and *[caraṇa](caraṇa.md)* with 15 qualities (sīla\-saṃvara, indriyesu guttadvāra etc.). The same 3 vijjās (No. 6, 7, 8) are given at DN.iii.220, DN.iii.275, and poetically at AN.ii.165 as the characteristics of a proper (ariya, *Buddhist*) monk (or brāhmaṇa): “etāhi tīhi vijjāhi *tevijjo* hoti brāhmaṇo,” opposing the three Veda\-knowledge of the Brahmins  
   ■ Tevijja (adj.) in same meaning at SN.i.146 (where it refers to Nos. 3, 5, 8 of above enumn), SN.i.192, SN.i.194. In *brahmanic* sense at Snp.594 (= tiveda Snp\-a.463). Both meanings compared contrasted at AN.i.163 (aññathā brāhmaṇā brāhmaṇaṃ tevijjaṃ paññāpenti, aññathā ca pana ariyassa vinaye tevijjo hoti “different in the Brahmanic and diff. in the Buddhist sense”)  
   ■ *Tisso vijjā* (without specification but referring to above 6, 7, 8) further at Vin.ii.183; Snp.656; Pts.i.34; Pts.ii.56; Pv.iv.1#34; Mil.359 (\+ chaḷabhiññā); Dhp\-a.iv.30 (id.). It is doubtful whether the defn of *[ñāṇa](ñāṇa.md)* as “tisso vijjā” at Vin.iii.91 is genuine. On *vijjā\-caraṇa* see also DN.iii.97, DN.iii.98, DN.iii.237; SN.i.153, SN.i.166 SN.ii.284; SN.v.197; AN.ii.163; AN.iv.238; AN.v.327; Snp.163, Snp.289, Snp.442\-On *[vijjā](vijjā.md)* in the doctrinal appln see: DN.iii.156, DN.iii.214 DN.iii.274; SN.ii.7 sq. (cakkhu, ñāṇa, paññā, vijjā, āloka), SN.iii.47; SN.iii.163; SN.iii.171; SN.iv.31, SN.iv.49 sq. AN.i.83; AN.ii.247; Snp.334 (simply meaning “wisdom,” craft, care, but Bdhgh Snp\-a.339 takes it as “āsavānaṃ\-khaya\-ñāṇa”), Snp.1026 (opposed to avijjā); Pp.14, Pp.57; Vb.324; Ne.76, Ne.191
3. *popular* meanings & usage of; *[vijjā](vijjā.md)*: science, craft, art, charm spell DN.i.213 (Gandhārī nāma v., also mentioned at Ja.iv.498 as practised by physicians), Ja.iv.214 (Maṇika n. v.); Ja.iii.504 (cintāmaṇi v.); Ja.iv.323 (vatthu˚: see under *[vatthu](vatthu.md)*), Ja.iv.498 (ghora˚); Ja.v.458 (anga˚ palmistry) Mil.200; Dhp.i.259 (bhūmicala n. v. “earthquake charm), Dhp.i.265 (dhanu\-agamanīyaṃ Ambaṭṭha n. v.); Kp\-a.237 (vatthu˚, khetta˚, anga˚); and see the list of forbidden crafts at DN.i.9 (anga˚, vatthu˚, *khetta˚*; etc. cp. *Dial.* i.18, 19).

* *\-[gata](gata.md)* having attained wisdom Snp.730 (opp. avijjā the playful expln at Snp\-a.505 is “ye arahatta\-maggavijjāya kilese *vijjhitvā* gatā khīṇāsava\-sattā”).
* *\-[caraṇa](caraṇa.md)* (\-sampanna) (endowed with) special craft (wisdom) virtue: see above, b.;
* *\-ṭṭhāna* branch of study; there are 18 *vijja\-ṭṭhānāni* or “arts & sciences,” subjects of study referred to at Ja.i.259.
* *\-[dhara](dhara.md)* a knower of charms, a sorcerer Ja.iii.303, Ja.iii.529; Ja.iv.496; Ja.v.94; Mil.153, Mil.200, Mil.267
* *\-bhāgiyā* (dhammā) (states) conducive to wisdom (6 kinds of saññā) AN.iii.334; cp. DN.iii.243; SN.v.395; AN.iv.52 sq.
* *\-mayā* (iddhi) (potency) accomplished by art or knowledge (*Expos.* i.122) Vism.383; see *[iddhi](iddhi.md)*.
* *\-[vimutti](vimutti.md)* wisdom (higher knowledge) as salvation SN.v.28 SN.v.335 sq.; Pts.ii.243 (in detail). Vijju & vijjuta

cp. Vedic vidyā knowledge: etym. see under *[vindati](vindati.md)*

