# yoga

``` toml
dict_label = "PTS"
word = "yoga"
summary = "lit. “yoking, or being yoked,” i.e. connection bon"
see_also = ["kāya", "aḍḍhayoga", "yāca", "manta", "datvā", "vatvā", "vatvā", "nibbāna", "bahula", "yutta", "vibhāga"]
```

lit. “yoking, or being yoked,” i.e. connection bond, means; fig. application, endeavour, device

1. yoke, yoking (rare?) Ja.vi.206 (meant here the yoke of the churning\-sticks; cp. Ja.vi.209).
2. connection with (\-˚), application to; (natural) relation (i.e. body, living connection), association; also conjunction (of stars). *mānusaka yoga* the relation to the world of men (the human body), opp. *dibba yoga*: SN.i.35 = SN.i.60; Snp.641; Dhp.417; explained at Dhp\-a.iv.225 as “*[kāya](kāya.md)*.” association with: DN.iii.176; application: Vism.520 (\+ uppāda). *yogato* (abl.) from being connected with by association with Pv\-a.40 (bālya˚), Pv\-a.98 (sammappadhāna˚)  
   ■ *pubba˚*; connection with a former body, one’s former action or life\-history Ja.v.476; Ja.vi.480; Mil.2 See pubbe1  
   ■ *[aḍḍhayoga](aḍḍhayoga.md)* a “half\-connected” building, i.e. a half\-roofed monastery Vin.i.239; Vism.34\- *nakkhatta˚*; a conjunction of planets, peculiar constellation (in astrology) Ja.i.82, Ja.i.253 (dhana\-vassāpanaka suitable for a shower of wealth); Ja.iii.98; Dhp\-a.i.174; Dhs\-a.232 (in simile).
3. (fig.) bond, tie; attachment (to the world and its lusts), or what yokes to rebirth (*Cpd.* 1712). There are 4 *yogas*, which are identical with the 4 *oghas* viz. kāma˚, bhava˚, diṭṭhi˚, avijjā˚ or the bonds of craving, existence, false views, and ignorance; enumerated in detail at AN.ii.10; DN.iii.230, DN.iii.276; Ja.i.374; cp. Pts.i.129 (catūhi yogehi yutto lokasannivāso catu\-yoga\-yojito); Vb\-a.35. Mentioned or referred to at SN.v.59; Dhs.1059 (ogha \+ , in defn of taṇhā), cp, *Dhs translation* 308; Ne.31 (with ogha), Ne.114 (id.); as *sabba\-* (or sabbe) yogā at Thig.4; Thig.76; SN.i.213; Dhp\-a.iii.233; severally at Iti.95 (bhava\-yoga\-yutta āgāmī hoti, \+ kāma˚); *ogha \+ yoga*: Pp.21 (avijjā˚) Vism.211, Vism.684; cp. also DN.ii.274 (pāpima\-yogāni the ties of the Evil one); Iti.80 (yogā pamocenti bahujanaṃ)
4. application, endeavour, undertaking, effort Dhp\-a.iii.233, Dhp\-a.iii.234 (= samma\-ppadhāna). *yogaṃ karoti* to make an effort, to strive after (dat.) SN.ii.131; AN.ii.93 (āsavānaṃ khayāya y. karaṇīya); Mil.35. *yogaṃ āpajjati* to show (earnest) endeavour, to be active SN.iii.11 sq.; Vb.356 (attanā)  
   ■ *dhamma˚*; one who is devoted to the Dhamma AN.iii.355; *yutta˚*; (bent on, i.e. earnest in endeavour Ja.i.65; *yāca˚*; given to making offerings: see *[yāca](yāca.md)*.
5. pondering (over), concentration devotion MN.i.472; Dhp.209 (= yoniso manasikāra Dhp\-a.iii.275), Dhp.282 (same expln at Dhp\-a.iii.421); Mil.3 Vb.324 (yoga\-vihitesu kamm’ & sipp’\-āyatanesu Vb\-a.410 explains: y. vuccati paññā  
   ■ perhaps better to above 4?).
6. (magic) power, influence, device scheme Ja.vi.212 (yoga\-yogena practice of spells etc = tāya tāya yuttiyā C.); Pv\-a.117 (combined with *[manta](manta.md)* ascribed to devas).
7. means, instrument, remedy Ja.i.380 (vamana˚ an emetic); Ja.vi.74 (ekaṃ yogaṃ datvā but we better read bhesajjaṃ tassa *[datvā](datvā.md)* for *[vatvā](vatvā.md)* and ekaṃ yogaṃ *[vatvā](vatvā.md)* for datvā; taking yoga in meaning of “charm, incantation”); Mil.109 (yena yogena sattānaṃ guṇa\-vaḍḍhi… tena hitaṃ upadahati).

*\-ātiga* one who has conquered the yoke, i.e. bond of the body or rebirth Iti.61 (muni), Iti.81 (id.). *\-ātigāmin* ˚âtiga; AN.ii.12 (same as sabba\-yoga\-visaṃyutta) *\-āvacara* “one at home in endeavour,” or in spiritual (esp. jhāna\-) exercises; one who practises “yoga” an earnest student. The term is peculiar to the Abhidhamma literature  
■ Ja.i.303, Ja.i.394, Ja.i.400; Ja.iii.241 (saṃsārasāgaraṃ taranto y.); Pts.ii.26; Kvu\-a.32; Mil.33 sq., Mil.43 , Mil.366, Mil.378 sq.; Vism.245 (as hunter), Vism.246 (as begging bhikkhu), Vism.375 (iddhi\-study), Vism.587, Vism.637, Vism.666, Vism.708; Dhp\-a.ii.12 (padhānaṃ padahanto y.); Dhp\-a.iii.241 (˚bhikkhu) Dhs\-a.187 (ādhikammika), Dhs\-a.246 (˚kulayutta); Vb\-a.115, Vb\-a.220, Vb\-a.228 (as bhikkhu on alms\-round), Vb\-a.229 (as hunter), Vb\-a.258, Vb\-a.331; Kp\-a.74; Snp\-a.20, Snp\-a.374. *\-kkhema* [already Vedic yoga\-kṣema exertion & rest, acquisition & possession] rest from work or exertion, or fig. in scholastic interpretation “peace from bondage,” i.e. perfect peace or “uttermost safety” (*K.S.* ii.132); a freq. Epithet of *[nibbāna](nibbāna.md)* [same in BSk.: *yogakṣema* e.g. Divy.98, Divy.123, Divy.303, Divy.498] MN.i.117 (˚kāma), MN.i.349, MN.i.357 (anuttara); SN.i.173 (˚adhivāhana); SN.ii.195 (anuttara) SN.ii.226; SN.iii.112 (˚kāma, neg.); SN.iv.125; SN.v.130 sq.; AN.i.50 (anuttara); AN.ii.40, AN.ii.52 (a˚), AN.ii.87, AN.ii.247; AN.iii.21, AN.iii.294 sq., AN.iii.353; DN.iii.123, DN.iii.125, DN.iii.164 (˚kāma); Vin.ii.205 = Iti.11 (˚ato dhaṃsati, whereas Vin ˚ā padhaṃsati); Iti.9, Iti.27 (abhabbo ˚ssa adhigamāya); Thig.6; Snp.79 (˚adhivāhana), Snp.425; Dhp.23 (anuttara, cp. Dhp\-a.i.231); Pts.i.39; Pts.ii.81; Vb.247 (kulāni y\-kh\-kāmāni, which Vb\-a.341 explains catūhi yogehi khemaṃ nibbhayaṃ icchanti); Thag\-a.13\-kkhemin finding one’s rest, peace, or salvation; emancipated free, an Arahant SN.iii.13 (accanta˚); SN.iv.85; AN.ii.12; AN.iv.310 (patta˚); AN.v.326 (accanta˚); Dhp\-a.iii.233 Dhp\-a.iii.234 (= sabba\-yoga\-visaṃyutta); neg. *a˚*; not finding one’s salvation AN.ii.52 (in verse) = Pts.ii.80; Iti.50\-ññu knowing the (right) means Mil.169 sq. *\-[bahula](bahula.md)* strong in exertion AN.iii.432. *\-[yutta](yutta.md)* (Mārassa) one who is tied in the bonds (of Māra) AN.ii.52 (so read for ˚gutta the verse also at Pts.ii.80, Pts.ii.81, and Iti.50). *\-[vibhāga](vibhāga.md)* dividing (division) of the relation (in grammar: to yoga 2) Snp\-a.266.

Vedic yoga, see etym. under yuga & yuñjati. Usually m.; pl. nt. yogāni occurs at DN.ii.274 in meaning “bonds”

