# ā

``` toml
dict_label = "PTS"
word = "ā"
summary = "Ā1 indeclinable a frequent prefix, used as well-de"
see_also = ["a", "phalāphala", "bhavābhava"]
```

Ā1

indeclinable a frequent prefix, used as well\-defined simple base\-prefix (with rootderivations), but not as modification (i.e. first part of a double prefix cpd. like sam\-ā\-dhi) except in one case ā\-ni\-saṃsa (which is doubtful & of diff. origin, viz. from combn. āsaṃsa\-nisaṃsa, see below 3b). It denotes either *touch* (contact) or a personal (close) relation to the object (ā ti anussaraṇ’ atthe nipāto Pv\-a.165), or the *aim* of the action expressed in the verb

1. As *prep.* c. abl only in Ja in meaning “up to, until, about, near” Ja.vi.192 (ā sahassehi = yāva s. C.), prob. a late development As *pref.* in meaning “forth, out, to, towards, at, on” in foll. applications:
   1. *aim* in general or *touch* in particular (lit.), e.g. ākaḍḍhati pull to, along or up; ˚kāsa shining forth; ˚koṭeti knock *at;* ˚gacchati go towards ˚camati rinse over; ˚neti bring towards, *ad*\-duce; ˚bhā shining forth; ˚bhujati bend in; ˚masati touch at; ˚yata stretched out; ˚rabhati *at*\-tempt; ˚rohana a\-scending; ˚laya hanging on; ˚loketi look at; ˚vattati ad\-vert; ˚vahati bring to; ˚vāsa dwelling at; ˚sādeti touch; ˚sīdati sit by ˚hanati strike at
   2. in *reflexive* function: close relation to *subject* or person actively concerned, e.g. ādāti take on or up (to oneself); ˚dāsa looking at, mirror ˚dhāra support; ˚nandati rejoice; ˚nisaṃsa subjective gain ˚bādha being affected; ˚modita pleased; ˚rakkha guarding ˚rādhita satisfied; ˚rāma (personal) delight in; ˚lingati embrace (to oneself); ˚hāra taking to (oneself)
   3. in *transitive* function: close relation to the *object* passively concerned, e.g. āghātana killing; ˚carati indulge in; ˚cikkhati point ont, explain; ˚jīva living on; ˚ṇāpeti give an order to somebody; ˚disati point out to some one; ˚bhindati cut; ˚manteti ad\-dress; ˚yācati pray to; ˚roceti speak to; siñcati besprinkle; ˚sevati indulge in
   4. out of meaning (a) develops that of an intensive\-frequentative prefix in sense of “all\-round, completely, very much” e.g. ākiṇṇa strewn all over, ˚kula mixed up; ˚dhuta moved about; ˚rāva shouting out or very much; ˚luḷati move about; ˚hiṇḍati roam about.

2. *Affinities.* Closely related in meaning and often interchanging are the foll prep. (prefixes): anu (˚bhati), abhi (˚saṃsati), pa (˚tapati) paṭi (˚kankhati) in meaning (1) a\-c; and vi (˚kirati ˚ghāta, ˚cameti, ˚lepa, ˚lopa), sam (˚tapati, ˚dassati) in meaning (1) d. See also 3b.
3. *Combinations:*
   1. Intensifying combns. of other modifying prefixes with ā as base anu \+ ā (anvā\-gacchati, ˚disati, ˚maddati, ˚rohati, ˚visati ˚sanna, ˚hata), paṭi \+ ā (paccā\-janati, ˚ttharati, ˚dāti, ˚savati), pari \+ ā (pariyā\-ñāta, ˚dāti, ˚pajjati, ˚harati), sam \+ ā (samā\-disati, ˚dāna, ˚dhi, ˚pajjati, ˚rabhati)
   2. Contrast\-combns. with other pref. in a double cpd. of noun, adj or verb (cp. above 2) in meaning of “up & down, in & out to & fro”; ā \+ ni: āvedhika\-nibbedhika, āsaṃsa\-nisaṃsa (contracted to ānisaṃsa), āsevita\-nisevita; ā \+ pa: assasatipassasati (where both terms are semantically alike; in exegesis however they have been differentiated in a way which looks like a distortion of the original meaning viz. assasati is taken as “breathing *out*“, passasati as “breathing *in*“: see Vism.271), assāsa\-passāsa, āmoditapamodita, āhuna\-pāhuna, āhuneyya\-pāhuneyya; ā \+ paccā ākoṭita\-paccākoṭita; *ā \+ pari*: ākaḍḍhana\-parikaḍḍhana āsankita\-parisankita; *ā \+ vi*: ālokita\-vilokita, āvāha\-vivāha āveṭhana\-viniveṭhana; *a \+ sam*: allāpa\-sallāpa: *ā \+ samā* āciṇṇa\-samāciṇṇa.

4. Before double consonants ā is shortened to a and words containing ā in this form are to be found under a˚, e.g. akkamaṇa, akkhitta, acchādeti aññāta, appoṭeti, allāpa, assāda.

Vedic ā, prep. with acc., loc., abl., meaning “to, towards”, & also “from”. Orig. an emphatic\-deictic part. (Idg. \*ē) = Gr. ̓ ̈η surely, really; Ohg \-ā etc., increment of a (Idg. \*e), as in Sk. a\-sau; Gr. εκεϊ (cp. a3) see Brugmann, *Kurze Vergl. Gr.* 464, 465

Ā˚2

guṇa or increment of a˚ in connection with such suffixes as\-ya, \-iya, \-itta. So in āyasakya fr. ayasaka; āruppa from arūpa; ārogya fr. aroga; ālasiya fr. alasa; ādhipacca fr. adhipati; ābhidosika fr. abhidosa etc.

Ā˚3

of various other origins (guṇa e.g. of ṛ or lengthening of ordinary root a˚), rare, as ālinda (for alinda), āsabha (fr. usabha).

Ā˚4

infix in repetition\-compounds denoting accumulation or variety (by contrast with the opposite, cp. ā1 3b), constitutes a guṇa\-or increment\-form of neg. pref. a (see *[a](a.md)*2), as in foll.: *[phalāphala](phalāphala.md)* all sorts of fruit (lit. what is fruit not fruit) freq. in Jātakas, e.g. ; Ja.i.416; Ja.ii.160; Ja.iii.127 Ja.iv.220, Ja.iv.307, Ja.iv.449; Ja.v.313; Ja.vi.520; *kāraṇākāraṇāni* all sorts of duties Ja.vi.333; Dhp\-a.i.385; *khaṇḍākhaṇḍa* pêle\-mêle Ja.i.114; Ja.iii.256; *gaṇḍāgaṇḍa* a mass of boils Dhp\-a.iii.297; *cirāciraṃ* continually Vin.iv.261; *[bhavābhava](bhavābhava.md)* all kinds of existences Snp.801, cp. Mnd.109; Cnd.664; Thag.784 (˚esu = mahant\-âmahantesu bh. C., see *Brethren* 305); rūpârūpa the whole aggregate Thag\-a.285; etc.

